VISIT REPORT L.Burnard 
TO    ICL Slough 10 Jan 85
FOR ICLCUA CAFS SIG WP 

1. The Chairman reported that the appalling D. Lovegrove (CAFS marketing 
manager) has proposed regular meetings between a panel of ICL experts
and the working party, the first of these to be on St Valentines Day. 
Detailed responses will be given to the list of gripes in the WP's first
report, plus any others delivered in time. The names proposed for the
panel (a dozen or so) are impressive. 

eith Jones of Berkshire County Council described the new county library
project which will allow the general public to access the libraries
catalogue by means of viewdata screens. The initial system will allow 
users to find out what books are available on a specified subject, by a
specific author or containing a specified word in the title, and how 
many are available or out on loan at which libraries. It will
(probably) be supported by Bulletin (ICL's teletext system) and CAFS, 
apparently a unique combination.

BCC have a long history of computerisation; they are also planning an 
impressive computer cataloguing of their archives, which are extensive.
Viewdata is seen as a useful extension of their public services, e.g.
to replace out of data information booklets on social services, to
provide messaging facilities between outlying old folks homes etc etc.

The libraries main acquisition, issue and maintenance system runs under -
a package called P29 which incidentally uses QM and hence CAFS; they 
have no intention of expanding this, and are waiting for RCI before any
further CAFS usage is planned. Three problems were reported: (1) the
familiar cry of "Where is SV2I1" (2) Bulletin pages cannot be written to
in Batch or TP (!) and (3) Bulletin does not support "Unsolicited
Messages". These are nothing to do with the Readers Digest, but
Viewdata Jargon for frames which are displayed in sequence (also known
as a "carousel") while the frame you are looking for is being tracked
down, (They will presumably display a potter's wheel). A delay of
about 20-30 seconds is anticipated while CAFS finds the required data
and Bulletin formats it.

BCC have a 12 Mb 2976 and a 16 Mb 2966 driving around 200 terminals of
various types; 40 of these will be viewdata terminals and 24 for library
a staff usage. The total database fits onto one FDS640 (just) and
contains about 1 1/2 million title records. As they are using the British
Telecom kilostream network, it will also be accessible via PSS from home
computers, JANET etc. The system has to be working by July Ist when the
new Reading library will be opened.

3. Hamish Carmichael gave a brief lack-of-progress report on: 
<pb/>

INDEPOL (formerly the CAFS-800 system) Phase 0 is on field trial; phase
1, which will support updating, has no dates. It is a free standing
product, but an interface to DDS is in the design. It comes out of 
ICL's Defence Technology Centre whose current position is that it will
be available only to MOD and some Police authorities. This is either
because it has some very special security facilities or because they
want to recoup their development costs. I am not allowed to say any
more than that. 

TEXTMASTER is the internal name for a Status-like package with links to ;
word processing, office automation etc. It is still some way off but a
Statement of Direction will be published later this month. 

A new CAFS advertising campaign will be launched shortly. By the end of
1984, there were 400 units on order and 300 installed (average of 2.6 a
units per processor); this is believed to be slightly better than the | aes
Britton-Lee machine, which is CAFS's only current competition. 
Meanwhile ICL's sales force needs to be banged around the head somewhat
an activity which will clearly delight the appalling D. Lovegrove, and
Beaumont is planning a ‘CAFS exploitation’ seminar.

The Logica/DCI involvement had clearly been a success; "several" other 
software houses had expressed interest, the only one specified being
Savant who are planning a VME/CAFS version of MIMER. 

The first whisper of something called the Advanced Cafs Option was
heard. This had arisen out of the experience gained with the Inland
Revenue COP project and is basically a number of VME bolt-ons enabling
secondary indexing at the RECMAN level (hence invisible to QM, DCI etc)
to partition really big databases. It will also support searches acros
ies multiple CAFS controllers (gulp).

After a routinely awful ICL buffet lunch, we turned to the next WP
report. The final revisions to our questionnaire were agreed. Around
100 sites are to be contacted. The Report sections were shared out. I
volunteered for the "Case Studies" section because it looked most
interesting. Our chairman (who runs a tight ship) hopes to get a draft
together by April.

