Humanities Computing in Oxford: a Retrospective

Lou Burnard

Recent visitors to  OUCS or the HCU web pages may have
noticed that there has been major reorganization of the structure of
OUCS, as a part of which it has been decided to close the Humanities
Computing Unit as a distinct division within OUCS; HCU staff
are all however very much still present and (in several cases) playing
major roles in the newly reorganized OUCS structure. 

The beginnings of something we might call "humanities computing" at
Oxford go back a very long way. As early as 1965, the Computing
Laboratory's annual report includes reference to research undertaken
into "computer techniques for the analysis of Shakespearian texts"
[1]. In 1974, the University appointed a teaching officer with
specific responsibility for introducing the use of computers to
non-scientific students and staff. Over the next six years Susan
Hockey developed programming courses (in a language called Snobol)
appropriate to arts graduates, and promoted an awareness of a wide
range of research applications for "computing in the arts" (see for
example her book [2]), for the most part focussing on the abilities
which the mainframes of that distant era offered for searching and
"analysing" textual data. In 1976, I invented the Oxford Text Archive
as a means of collecting such machine-readable texts as could be
found, transferring them from punched cards or paper tape to magnetic
tape, and redistributing them to the research community.

During the eighties, Oxford's growing reputation as a national home
for these esoteric activities was further consolidated by a series of
substantial grants.  In 1978, the Computer Board funded development of
a new computer program for textual analysis, to be called the Oxford
Concordance Program. Shortly afterwards, the Board also funded the
purchase and installation of a Kurzweil Data Entry Machine, on which
OUCS provided the first of many national services. The Kurzweil ("KDEM")
was an ingenious optical character reader, which could recognize Latin
and non-Latin fonts with an acceptable level of accuracy. This
technology, now commonplace, was remarkable enough at the time to get
coverage in the Oxford Times [3]. The Computer Board also funded the
installation of another Oxford first, the Monotype Lasercomp
typesetter, which enabled OUCS to offer a high quality digital
typesetting service to the whole academic community, at a time when
the notion of desktop publishing was still only nascent. The Lasercomp
and KDEM services kept going until the early nineties, by which time
they seemed oddly anachronistic.

During the nineties, humanities computing, along with every other
kind, changed out of all recognition. This was not simply a matter of
the replacement of the central mainframe by the distributed desktop
machine, or the vast increase in computer literacy and usage in the
general population, but also of a transformation im the kinds of
specialist support services required. Indications of the
transformation are clearly to be found in Oxford's activities at the
end of the eighties. The OUCS 1986/7 Annual Report records Oxford's
participation in an experimental humanities computing bulletin board
set up by the British Library's "Office for Humanities Communication"
at Leicester (this was a very early version of what we now know as a
Humanities Portal), while the following year's Annual report remarks
presciently that "many research workers in the humanities now
doubtless prefer to carry out their work on microcomputers, provided
that the necessary software tools can be obtained."

During the nineties, "humanities computing" became more
institutionalised, with major government initiatives increasingly
funding large scale programmes such as the Computers in Teaching
Initiative (CTI) designed to increase the uptake of IT in academic
teaching and learning, whether as a substitute for human teachers (as
some feared in those Thatcherite days) or as a means of improving its
quality. In 1989, Oxford was awarded three year's funding to set up a
CTI Centre in Literary and Linguistic Studies, which (like the six
other centres set up at the same time) would "act as a repository for
computer-based teaching materials in specific subject areas, and a
source of advice and information to working academics". For the best
part of a decade thereafter Oxford's CTI Centre staff produced
newsletters and reports, organized conferences and workshops, and
above all went on the road, visiting almost every humanities
department in British Universities in the cause of
computer-consciousness-raising.

Local interest and support also blossomed in the enthusiasm of the
early nineties. By 1994, a Centre for Humanities Computing had been
created within OUCS to provide specialist support and training on
"software and hardware which has particular relevance to scholars and
students in the humanities faculties". The CHC had its own resources
room, ran courses and workshops, notably graduate training days; --
and also produced a newsletter each term called "Humanities Computing
in Oxford". Affiliated with it and the CTI Centre were a number of
other R&D projects, which over the next decade were to produce an
impressive portfolio of activities, ranging from software products
such as the Poetry Shell for teaching hypermedia, to exemplary
resources such as the Wilfred Owen digital archive, reports and
publications such as the CTI Centre's "Resource Guide", conferences
and workshops of all kinds, and a national and international
reputation as a centre of excellence and expertise.

On the world stage, the academic year 1994/95 saw the publication of
the first edition of the TEI Guidelines, possibly the most influential
of the research activities associated with humanities computing at
Oxford. It also saw the publication of the British National Corpus, a
100 million word corpus of British English which still sets the
standard for such resources, and, at the end of the year, publication
of the feasibility study which eventually lead to the establishment of
a national Arts and Humanities Data Service.

In October 1995, all the humanities-related projects and activities at
OUCS were integrated, to form the Humanities Computing Unit (HCU).
Over the next six years, the HCU built up its various constituent
parts, maintaining a balance between the needs of increasingly
demanding IT-aware faculties and departments at Oxford, and the
University's obligations to external funding bodies. Computing
technologies change at such a rate that today's leading-edge research
is often tomorrow's consumer product. Remaining in touch with that
research is correspondingly important to provision of IT support for
researchers and teachers. 

In teaching and learning, Oxford's IT strategy favoured the
decentralization of IT support, yet there was at that time no obvious
place in the Humanities to which such activities could be devolved,
without massive expansion in the level of IT support at college and
departmental level. With the help of an interfaculty Committee for
Computing in the Arts, the HCU lobbied successfully for additional
funding of IT support staff located within the departments, while at
the same time contributing the expertise of its own staff to teaching
departmental introductory courses.  The HCU also established a new
"Humanities Computing Development Team" to work collaboratively with
academic staff to develop new applications of ITC in teaching and
research on a project by project basis. As with other locally funded
services, the success of the HCDT soon lead to an expansion of its
brief beyond the Humanities, and it was rebranded as the Academic
Computing Development Team in 2000.

At the start of the new millenium, the HCU employed over 20 people,
half of them on external grants and contracts valued at over 350,000
annually. With the advent of divisionalization, however, it faced a
new challenge and a new environment, in which OUCS, as a
centrally-funded service, must take particular care to meet the needs
of the whole University, in a way which complements the support activities
funded by individual divisions, rather than competing with or supplanting
them.

Our strategy has been to focus on areas where the HCU's long
experience in promoting better usage of IT within one discipline can
be generalized. In 2001, we set up a new Learning Technologies Group,
to act as a cross-disciplinary advocacy and development focus for the
integration of IT into traditional teaching and learning. This new LTG
is now one of four key divisions within the new OUCS, additionally
responsible for the full range of OUCS training activities. In 2002,
as part of the same reorganization, we are setting up a complementary
Research Technologies Service which will bring together three
nationally-funded research support services: the Text Archive, the
Humbul Humanities Hub, and the Oxford eScience Centre. Intrinsically
interdisciplinary, and methodologically focussed, the "Humanities
computing" spirit will thus surely continue to thrive at Oxford as
well as it has for the last three decades, in whatever institutional
structures makes its home.

[1] Annual Report of the Computing Laboratory, 1964-1965;
available from
http://www.oucs.ox.ac.uk/internal/annrep/annrep64-65.html

[2] Susan Hockey "A guide to computer applications in the Humanities"
London: Duckworth, 1980. (Reviewed in the TLS by L D Burnard, 9 May
1980, p 533)

[3] "Jane Austen on the computer" Oxford Times article.


